---
layout: post
title: Chess and the Antagonist
category:
- frontpage
- tropometry
tags: tv film
year: 2015
month: 04
day: 26
date: 2015-04-26
published: true
summary: Intelligent character? Check. Overuse of a cliche? Check.
wideimg: chess
readmore: Checkmate
---
According to a lot of writers, being intelligent is equivalent to being infinitely educated.
Chess is a frequent casualty of this logical fallacy.

I started playing chess aged 9, played regularly until I was 11 and I've recently picked up the game again.
Back then, I played often and could beat anyone who didn't, which makes me a supervillain according to a lot of screenwriters.
I'm sure they also think Batman could beat Rafael Nadal at tennis,
which is a rumoured plot for the first Batman standalone after the Justice League film.{% include ref.html text="At least, it is now. Tell everybody. It's called *The Dark Knight Returns Serve*." %}

Chess is so often introduced as a pointer toward a villain being particularly logical and ruthless,
though there are exceptions.

## Weasley v McGonagall

Take Ronald Weasley.
Everyone's favourite Dumbledore declared 12-year-old Ron{% include ref.html	text="Ron was born 1st March 1980; Harry murders his first DADA teacher on [4th June 1992](http://www.hp-lexicon.org/timelines/calendars/calendar_ps.html \"Harry Potter Calendar\")." %}
to have played "the greatest game of chess Hogwarts had ever seen,"
which either means wizards are terrible at chess or that instead of either noticing his rat was Timothy Spall or attending latin class
&ndash; come on mate, it's *ede līmācēs* &ndash;
Ronald Weasley misspent his youth studying a game not even bookish Hermione bothered perfecting.

{% include	image.html	url="http://i.ytimg.com/vi/T5QwKcymGoM/maxresdefault.jpg"	caption="The Watchful Protector. The Silent Guardian. The Dark (King's) Knight."	lightbox="Chess"	title="Ron ponders his next move instead of whipping out his phone to use an online chess computer like a normal kid." %}

I'm not even sure why Rowling wrote the Chess challenge,
but perhaps Wizard's Chess was reverse-engineered from the need to have transfiguration used as part of McGonagall's stone defence.
How you conclude that the best way to use marble slaves to protect alchemy's top prize is by using an ancient board game, I'm not sure.
If you have to beat them at chess to win, why couldn't they just block the door regardless?

Also, I'm all for transfigured chess pieces moving, but McGonagall still had to infuse them with some serious AI.
Minerva's a technowitch.

## X-Chess

Harry Potter is an oddity, where chess seems to be an inclusion for little or no reason.
In Bryan Singer's groundbreaking *X-Men*
movies{% include ref.html	text="Today's army of comic book film franchises owes its existence to Singer's *X-Men* and *X2* and Raimi's *Spider-Man*, without which a commission for *Iron Man* would have been infeasible." %}
and in the ensuing franchise, however,
Magneto and Professor X have themselves a cosy game after the former's every attempted genocide for much clearer reasons.

It requires very little suspension of disbelief to accept that a professor of anthropology at Oxford University
from a well-to-do British family spent his youth playing chess.
Holocaust survivor and thinly-veiled Malcolm X analogue Magneto might have been a little less likely to pick up the game in his much more turbulent youth, but perhaps he found solace in its tactical and logical nature.

It nonetheless seems much more feasible he and Xavier would reach a similar level of ability in the game
than Ron Weasley could outclass every other student at Hogwarts ever.
I'd say Dumbledore definitely played chess when visiting Grindelwald in prison because they're pretty much Charles and Erik too.

{% include	image.html	url="http://media.comicbook.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/x-men-days-of-future-past-mtv-movie-awards.jpg"	caption="Weirdly, Charles always seems to know Erik's next planned move."	title="It's hard to tell from this picture, but I think Xavier has moved once and captured a pawn. Guy's a pro."	lightbox="Chess" %}

From a storytelling point of view, the chess here is more than its usual function as a marker of an intelligent foe.
It's a reversal of the abstraction which originally birthed chess.
Where the game is an analogy of a political battle,
the pair's constant struggle against one another is precisely that,
only with more civilian casualty and less turn-taking.

## 221b Checkmater Street

Sherlock sequel *A Game Of Shadows* sees Guy Ritchie's incarnation of John Moriarty play a game against the
ubiquitous{% include ref.html text="*adj.*: Out of copyright." %} Holmes.
They open by playing on a chessboard like mere mortals, upon a balcony overlooking Reichenbach Falls.
Shortly thereafter, they do away with all that physical pieces nonsense and choosing to complete the game in visual memory
by shouting moves at each other while simultaneously choreographing a stylised fistfight in a psychically linked dreamscape.

I'm hoping cinemagoers took that particular chess match with a bucketload of salt.
After all, this is from the same universe where Mark Strong rises from a tomb and attempts to exterminate parliament by gassing them with a poison to which he's built up an immunity, thereby combining a standard DC Comics plot, the Gunpowder plot and the plot of The New Testament.

The game in the film is supposedly inspired by [one between Bent Larsen vs. Tigran Petrosian from 1966](http://www.chess.com/blog/SFN/sherlock-holmesa-game-of-shadows) and you can watch RDJ's verbal checkmate here **(obviously spoilers)**:

{% include youtube.html id="XA1nAE1czuo" %}

Naturally, we're supposed to see this ability to play a game of chess without use of the board as an indicator of intellectual prowess.
Really – and this coming from someone who has tried it – it's an indicator of misspent intelligence and poorly directed boredom.
This makes no sense and jars massively with the characterisations of both our hero and villain.

Holmes is a man who would happily forget that the Earth orbits the Sun as it has no consequence on his ability to solve crimes.
Aside from this great passion, he has a single vice and a single hobby: cocaine and the violin, respectively.
There's no way he'd waste his limited brain space on something as inconsequential as chess.

He'd be a dab hand at poker thanks to his singular cold-reading skills, but chess is not something he'd waste time studying.

Moriarty is just dark Holmes.
Where Holmes uses his gift for deduction to solve crimes,
Moriarty uses his gift for construction to create them.

Of the pair, Moriarty is more tactically-minded and where Sherlock might be able to look at the end of a chess game and plot the preceding moves,
Moriarty could craft the endgame from the very opening.

Sherlock v Moriarty would be a landslide victory for old Dr Jim.

There's no chess-playing by Holmes or Moriarty in the Holmes canon – Conan Doyle's original 4 novels and 56 short stories.
The one occasion on which Holmes mentions chess is in reference to two characters in [*The Adventure of the Retired Colourman*](https://sherlock-holm.es/stories/pdf/a4/1-sided/reti.pdf).
Of one of them, Holmes remarks:

<blockquote>Amberley excelled at chess &ndash; one mark, Watson, of a scheming mind.</blockquote>

Did Conan Doyle start this whole chess-players-are-evil literary vibe?

## The Conman, The Heist and The Chessboard

Chess creeps into fictions that practice a little more realism than Ritchie's take on Holmes,
including superslick bigger-they-are-harder-they-fall crime series *Hustle*.

The show was one of the best the BBC ever made,
but some nincompoop declared that glamorising crime was not okay
without some Adam West-esque campness to take the edge off, from which campness the latter series suffered greatly.

The early series were a genuine pleasure, and episode four of the first featured conniving, IQ-boasting, former top cop Victor Maher.
His introduction to conman extroardinaire Michael "Mickey Bricks" Stone is cuttingly sinister
and speaks of Maher's massive boasty intellectness.

<div class="shrinkwrap">
<blockquote>Do you like chess, Michael?</blockquote>
<blockquote class="right">I prefer snakes and ladders.</blockquote>
</div>

We're then treated to a convoluted bank heist commissioned by Mr Maher, who happens to be the very same bank's head of security.

{% include	image.html	url="http://img2.wikia.nocookie.net/__cb20111010023616/thehustle/images/thumb/1/1b/Hustle_Cops_and_Robbers.jpg/500px-Hustle_Cops_and_Robbers.jpg"	caption="\"Okay, I've read the rules, but how does a castle jump over a king?\""	lightbox="Chess"	title="Victor Maher confronts Mickey Bricks in a totally unsuccesful attempt to beat him at metaphor-chess." %}

An *Ocean's Eleven*-esque plot twist then somehow negates the fact that everyone involved in the heist is totally going to prison
because it happens to be checkmate-like.
Genuinely, despite being a merciless megalomaniac,
big bad Maher accepts defeat for the sole reason that in the absence of any morality
he governs his actions based on chess etiquette and walks away from the metaphor-board instead of metaphor-throwing the metaphor-pieces around the metaphor-room.

It's kind of like how *The Usual Suspects*{% include ref.html text="I'm clearly having a very Singer day." %}
would have panned out if the police knew where Keiser Soze and Mr Kobayashi met for drinks,
but the police were so impressed with the whole [make-it-up-as-you-go-along thing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lost_%28TV_series%29) that they just let Soze walk.

## The Fastest Chess Alive

Still, the absolute worst, cheesiest, most pathetically lazy implementation of the "he won at chess so he must be an evil genius" trope
is in the camembert *Arrow* sister show *The Flash*, which is much more *Sarah Jane Adventures* than *Torchwood*.

If you've not seen *The Flash*,
all you really need to know is that JD from *Scrubs*'s big brother Dan is Dr Wells,
a good but possibly evil genius scientist confined to a wheelchair except he walks around when nobody's looking.

There are mutants but the showrunners can't/don't call them that and the series revolves around an exploding particle collider,
which would be topical if it were still 2008.

There's also a guy called Barry who can run really fast and he grins all the time,
presumably because all the other DC heroes would sue him for copyright infringement if he brooded.

{% include	image.html	url="https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/5e/3f/fd/5e3ffd6ab1416342493d2884e8e763d0.jpg"	lightbox="Chess"	caption="The face of a man who knows he never has to take the tube to work."	title="Even when he's surprised he's grinning." %}

A particularly lacking episode sees scorned physicist Hartley Rathaway launching a vendetta against
his evil-not-evil not-disabled former employer using a sonic boom thing which is linked to his ubertinnitis.
Ordinarily, we wouldn't be concerned, but in a flashback he beats Dr Wells at chess!
Obviously this means he's more dangerous than the previous 9 mutants-of-the-week.

{% include	image.html	imgur="f8zSGa2"	lightbox="Chess"	caption="Slimy-looking and good at chess? Barry's gonna have to run really *really* fast."	title="Dr Wells and Hartley Rathaway play a game of TV chess." %}

After a while, we have a showdown between the Cheshire cheetah and this
spectacled{% include ref.html text="Another sign of unforgivable intelligence." %} villain.
It seems to be going all *The Flash*'s way, only Dr Wells gives the red-leather-clad blur a warning to heed:

<blockquote>He's a master of concealing his endgame.</blockquote>

Yes, somebody not only wrote that line, but got paid for doing it.

Screenwriters are clever people, so why the reliance on chess as a cultural emblem for intelligence?
And why the distrust of a logical mind?
Besides which, the winner of a game of chess isn't the smarter, the more tactical, the more cunning or the more evil of the players:
it's whoever has better studied the game.

Thinking about that awful "concealing his endgame" line, I wonder if the writers of *The Flash* are of the same school of thought as Zapp Brannigan.

<blockquote>In the game of chess, Kif, one can never let one's opponent see one's pieces.</blockquote>

Or maybe they just confuse their games.

{% include youtube.html	id="KfU69_up02Y" %}